---
layout: releasenotes
title: Mono 0.11
version: 0.11.0
releasedate: '2002-04-24'
---

Hello everyone!

Mono 0.11 is out!

This new version has new features:

## Massive

* Ultrich Kunitz implemented the whole calendar set of
classes.  Yes, thats right.  The whole thing, with a
complete test suite.  Thanks Ultrich!

## JIT/runtime features

* Martin's debugging framework is included (see web
    site for details on how to use it). (Martin)

* Transparent Proxy has been implemented for the
    runtime (lets you run/debug/hack on remoting for Mono) (Dietmar)

* Inline and constant folding/propagation support
    in the JIT engine (Dietmar)

* Profiling support for the JIT engine (--profile).

## Cool runtime hacks, that made our compiler twice as fast

* New string rewrite: faster, speedier, leaner, cooler!

    Paolo had been talking about a new string rewrite,
    and super hacker Patrik Torstensson started the
    implementation, Dietmar then switched the object
    layout and the Mono team helped iron out a few of
    the details.

* New array reprensetation: Dan Lewis contributed a new
    faster and smaller array implementation.

* Improved Reflection.Emit: Paolo improved our
    reflection emit code.

## ADO.NET

* Daniel Morgan, Rodrigo Moya have some pieces of the
    Sql classes ready to run.  he first signs of life
    this week (we can connect, insert rows; do transactions:
    commit/rollback; SQL errors and exceptions work).

## Http Runtime

* The HTTP runtime (to be used by our ASP.NET implementation)
    was contributed by Patrik Torstensson.  Patrik not only
    contributed a massive ammount of classes, but he immediately
    went on to implement ThreadPools and then helped out with the
    new String rewrite.

## XML improvements

* Kral Ferch and Duncan Mak contributed more
    improvements to the XML implementation.

* Work on Xml Serialization from John Donagher.

## Documentation

* MonoDoc ships for the first time!
    (John Barnette, Adam Treat and John Sohn)

* New documentation stubs ready to be filled, and translated
    included (thanks to our doc team!)

## General fixes

* Piers Haken fixed many of our attributes and many
    little problems that were exposed by his CorCompare tool

* Many Mono C# compiler bug fixes.

## Other improvements

* NUnit works on Linux! (Patrik Torstensson)

* More NUnit tests (Nick Drochak)

* Windows.Forms progress: Dennis Hayes and Christian
    Meyer have been contributing stubs for the
    Windows.Forms work.

* Full Parse implementations and bug fixing by Gonzalo

* Dan Lewis contributed some missing classes for the
    Regexp implementation.

* Jonathan's trace classes

## This Month's Mono is brought to you by

Adam Treat, Chris Podugriel, Christian Meyer, Daniel Lewis,
Daniel Morgan, Dennis Hayes, Dick Porter, Dietmar Maurer,
Duncan Mak, Guarav Vaish, Gonzalo Paniagua, Jaime Anguiano,
Jason Diamond, Joe Shaw, John Barnette, John Donagher, John
Sohn, Jonathan Pryor, Kral Ferch, Martin Baulig, Miguel de
Icaza, Mike Kestner, Nick Drochak, Paolo Molaro, Patrik
Tostensson, Piers Haken, Ravi Pratap, Rodrigo Moya, Sergey
Chanben, Ultrich Kunitz, Wictor Wilen.

I know that I missed some features, there is a lot of work
that happens in a month.  I apologize in advance for any
features I omited by accident.

Special thanks go to Duncan for helping out with all those
little details in the project.  And also Nick who has been
keeping us in good shape by maintaining and helping new
contributors provide more test suites.

## Reporting bugs

If you find a bug in Mono, please file a bug here:

    http://bugzilla.ximian.com

That way we wont loose your bug report, and will be able to
follow up properly with it.  Also try to provide simple test
cases whenever possible and try as hard as possible to
identify the root of a problem (compiler, runtime, class
libraries).

## Forum

The mono-list-request@ximian.com mailing list is open for
those of you who want to discuss the future of Mono.
