---
layout: releasenotes
title: Mono 0.16
version: 0.16.0
releasedate: '2002-10-01'
---

Hello!

Version 0.16 of Mono has been released!  This is mostly a bug
fix release, a lot of work has been going on to make existing
features more robust and less buggy.   Also, contributions are
too varied, so it is hard to classify them in groups.

## Stats

795 commits to mono and mcs since August 23rd.

## News

The changes that got in this releases are mostly
bugfixes.  Miguel, Martin and Ravi attacked lots of bugs in the
compiler, Dick fixed a bunch of bugs related to processes and
threads.  Mark Crichton resumed his work on the SPARC port and
made lots of progress there.  Juli Mallett has been working on
making sure Mono also builds on BSD systems.  As usual, Dietmar
and Paolo supplied their continuous stream of fixes to the
runtime.

Dietmar has completed the work on the runtime side for
remoting support and we ship now with a sample channel, the
System.Runtime.Remoting.Sample.  This can be used as a
reference implementation for anyone interested in implementing
other channels (like a CORBA channel).

Duncan got preliminary XSLT support done by using libxslt.

Gonzalo (with some help from Patrik) has been working hard
making our ASP.NET implementation work on both Mono and MS by
migrating the existing xsp code to the class library.  Gaurav
started working on the classes in System.Design.dll and Chris
Toshok checked in Mono.Directory.LDAP, which will be the
foundation to implement the System.DirectoryServices assembly.

Various fixes from Kral, Jason, Piers and Gonzalo were
committed to System.Xml; Martin Algiers reports that the
upcoming NAnt release will be fully compatible with Mono.

Miguel imported Sergey Chaban's Mono.PEToolkit and ilasm code
to CVS.  Nick, as always, continues to refine our testing
framework by improving our tests.  Andrew Birkett continues to
improve the implementation of our security/cryptographic
classes.  Jonathan Pryor contributed type-reflector the our
list of tools.

## Other News From Behind de Curtain

While the above is pretty impressive on its own, various other
non-released portions of Mono have been undergoing: Adam Treat
has been leading the effort to document our class libraries
and produce the tools required for it.

Martin Baulig has been working on the Mono Debugger which is
not being released yet.  This debugger allows both native
Linux application as well as CIL applications to be debugged
at the same time (and in fact, you can use this to debug the
JIT engine).  The debugger is written in C# with some C glue

In the meant A new JIT engine is under development, focused on
adding more of the high-end optimizations which will be
integrated on an ahead-of-time-compiler.   Dietmar and Paolo
have been working on this.

## Contributors to this release

* Non-Ximian developers: Adam Treat, Andrew Birkett, Dennis
Hayes, Diego Sevilla, Franklin Wise, Gaurav Vaish ,Jason
Diamond, Johannes Roith, John Sohn, Jonathan Pryor, Juli
Mallett, Kral Ferch, Mike Crichton, Nick Drochak, Nick
Zigarovich, Piers Haken, Rafael Teixeira, Ricardo Fernandez
Pascual, Sergey Chaban, Tim Coleman.

* Ximian developers: Dietmar, Paolo, Dick, Duncan, Ravi,
Miguel, Martin, Chris, Joe, Gonzalo, Rodrigo.
