---
layout: releasenotes
title: Mono 0.18
version: 0.18.0
releasedate: '2003-01-12'
---

Happy new year!

The Mono team is proud to release Mono 0.18, with plenty of bug
fixes and improvements.  If you are a happy 0.17 user, this
release is a happiness extension release.  Many bugs in the
runtime, class libraries and C# compiler have been fixed.

Also, our special envoy in Japan has reported that there is
some naming confussion about the naming of Mono, as can be
seen in the following documentary material:

Atsushi Enomoto shows the source of confussion:

    http://primates.ximian.com/~duncan/gallery/Duncan-in-Tokyo/DSCN0702

Nick and Duncan echo it:

    http://primates.ximian.com/~duncan/gallery/Duncan-in-Tokyo/DSCN0703

## Availability

Mono 0.18 packages and source code is available for download from:

    http://www.mono-project.com/download/

Those using Red Carpet on Linux can install Mono 0.18 from
the Mono channel.  The packages have already been pushed for
you.

At release time we have packages for Red Hat 8.0, 7.3,
7.2 and 7.1 and Mandrake 8.2.

## Contributors to this release

This release is brought to you by:

Alejandro Sanchez, Alp Toker, Atsushi Enomoto, Cesar Octavio
Lopez Netaren, Daniel Lopez (mod_mono), Daniel Morgan, Dennis
Hayes, Dick Porter, Dietmar Maurer, Duncan Mak, Eduardo
Garcia, Gaurav Vaish, Gonzalo Paniagua, Jackson Harper, Jaime
Anguiano, Jeroen Janssen, Johannes Roith, Jonathan Pryor, Juli
Mallett, Lluis Sanchez, Marco Ridoni, Martin Baulig, Miguel de
Icaza, Nick Drochak, Paolo Molaro, Patrik Torstensson, Piers
Haken, Rachel Hestilow, Rafael Teixeira, Ravi Pratap,
Sebastian Pouliot, Tim Coleman, Tim Hayes, Ville Palo, Zoltan
Varga.

## New in this release

### VB.NET compiler

Many improvements to the Mono VB.NET compiler.

### ASP.NET

Plenty of bug fixes in ASP.NET.  Larger applications
can now be run with it.  The authentication system has
been deployed, most changes are from Gonzalo.

We have a modified IBuySpy running (without Xslt)

If you want to run ASP.NET you can run it with either
our XSP proof-of-concept server, or with Daniel's
Apache module that can be fetched from CVS (module
name: mod_apache)

### Type Reflector

A Console, Gtk# and Windows.Forms tool to browse
compiled assemblies and examine the types on it, from
Jonathan Pryor.

### Moving to NUnit 2.0

Nick continues the work on moving our test suite to NUnit 2.0

### Mobile.Controls

Gaurav has started work on the Mobile controls, which
are required to run some of the reference applications
in full-mode like IBuySpy.

### Remoting

The remoting infrastructure has got a big boost from
Lluis in this release.

### System.Data/XML

Ville has been working on improving our System.Data
classes in the XML assembly.

### Crypto

Plenty of new crypto from Sebastien as well.  A new
web page in our site can be used to track this.

    /docs/faq/security/
