---
layout: releasenotes
title: Mono 0.19
version: 0.19.0
releasedate: '2003-01-20'
---

Hello everyone!

We have made a new release of Mono available.  Despite the fact
that we just did Mono 0.18, this release is packed with new features.

## Availability

Mono 0.19 is available in package format from:

    http://www.mono-project.com/download/

We released packages for SuSE 8.0, Mandrake 8.2, Debian and various
Red Hat releases.  It is also available from Red Carpet on the Mono
channel.

Source code for Mono, MCS, the Mono Debugger, XSP is available as
well from that web page.

## New in this release

### Remoting news

Lluis has implemented and documented the Binary formatter
Woohoo!  He has done a lot of work as well to support
remoting.

Patrik has also been working heavily on fixing a
number of remoting related bugs and missing features.

Ajay also implemented 1-d array serialization in System.Xml

### New database provider: IBM DB2

Christopher Bockner has contributed a DB2 data
provider for System.Data.  We have a very complete
range of data providers.

### System.Web.Mobile

Gaurav has started work on this assembly, this will
allow us to run the unmodified reference ASP.NET
applications that were designed to support Mobile
browsing.

### System.Data and System.XML

More implementation work on XmlDataDocument from Ville
and plenty of fixes from Atsushi.

### MacOS patches

Paolo integrated John Duncan's and Benjamin Reed
patches to make Mono run on MacOS X out of the box.

### IsolatedStorage

The initial implementation of it was done by Jonathan
Pryor and included in this release.

### Compilers

More work on the Mono Visual Basic compiler (it is now
included in the packages).

Plenty of bug fixes from Jackson, Miguel to the C#
compiler.

Patches from Francesco and Daniel to the VB.NET
support runtime.

### Debugger support

Plenty of updates to run the new Mono Debugger from Martin.

## Main missing bits

Some of everyone's favorite patches or code chunks have not yet
been integrated, hopefully Mono 0.20 will have them:

* Zoltan's patch to run IKVM is not yet on this release

* Some parts of Patrik's remoting code did not make it to the
  release either.

* Reggie's MySQL native provider is also missing.

Enjoy!
Miguel.