---
title: Release Notes Mono 3.10.0
---

Mono 3.10.0 is a bugfix release with a few features.

Highlights
----------

- Implemented System.IO.Compression.FileSystem.
- Uri now implements the .NET 4.5 behavior, it can be reverted to the old behavior in the same way by setting the System.Uri::s_IriParsing static field to false.

Performance
-----------

- Remove unnecessary locking from core metadata parsing functions.
- Avoid cache thrashing of locals array when looping over enumerator.

Known Issues
============

The OSX packages have an invalid libgdiplus library that affects users of System.Drawing that requires it to work.<br/>
This specially affects Xamarin.Mac users that fit the following criteria:

- Uses Xamarin.Mac Classic (Unified is unaffected).
- Uses the subsets of System.Drawing that use libgdiplus.dylib internally<br/>
      - System.Drawing.RectangleF, PointF, Colors are unaffected<br/>
      - System.Drawing.Bitmap, and font for example are affected

The symptom of the problem is your application failing with: "System.TypeInitializationException: An exception was thrown by the type initializer for System.Drawing.GDIPlus ---> System.Exception: GdiplusStartup"

Bug fixes
=========

Runtime
-------

- Fix support for unaligned offsets in the store_membase_imm opcodes. Fixes #23267.
- Fix the lookup of nested types which have a namespace. Fixes #21653.
- Increase some opcode sizes. Fixes #23026.
- Always pass the imt arg to interface calls in gsharedvt methods. Fixes #22624.
- Store the epilog length in MonoArchEHJitInfo instead of encoding it in jinfo->unwind_desc, since the latter can overflow for methods with large epilogs. Fixes #22685.
- Add a mono_thread_detach_if_exiting () public api function which can be called by embedding code to detach the runtime if the code is running from a pthread dtor. Fixes #21164.
- Fix yet another native types problem. Fixes #22053.
- Fix the leaking of mach ports introduced by 98bbf8512aec0fa01b4426583280f6d231d22187. Fixes #22068.
- Add support for constrained calls with vtype return types in gsharedvt code. Fixes #22109.
- Fix the PLATFORM_GNU check so it works with gnueabi etc. as well. Fixes #21520.
- Don't make runtime invoke signatures generic. Fixes #21973.
- Allow v8..v15 in unwind info on arm64. Fixes part of #21615.
- Fix Process.PrivateMemorySize64 etc. on ios. Fixes #21882.
- Fix enum->int casts in gsharedvt code. Fixes #21893.
- Don't assert when loading a generic methodspec with 0 arity. Fixes #19097.
- Avoid asserting when a cattr cannot be loaded. Fixes #21653.
- Avoid making generic calls from gsharedvt methods normally, go through the rgctx infrastructure instead. Fixes #21677.

Class Libraries
---------------

- Fix Uri UserInfo parsing. Fixes 23246.
- Update RequestMessage.RequestUri.AbsoluteUri after redirect. Fixes #22383.
- Fixes XContainer attempt to create a XNode from a null value. Fixes #20151.
- Changed XObject OnChanged and OnChanging to use Owner. When XObject.Owner is not a XElement XObject.Parent returns null and the owner would not be notified of changing and changed events. Fixes #18772.
- Process XslLiteralElements with only child attributes as empty ones. Fixes #14751.
- 'finally' protect ClientRuntimeChannel.Begin/EndProcess(). Fixes #22179.
- WebClient.OpenWrite() must get the response on close. Fixes #10163.
- Fix WebClient.UploadValuesTaskAsync(); Fixes #20359.
- Improve System.Security.Claims. Fixes #22282.
- Fixed serialization of XmlNode field with attribute XmlAnyElement. Fixes #3211.
- Handle String::Format with escaped closing }. Fixes #22114
- Add a missing check to TypeBuilder.CreateType (). Fixes #22059.
- Xml Serialization of Base class w/o a parameterless constructor. Removed validation code that did not allowed serialization of base classes without a parameterless constructor. Fixes #6913.
- Fixed XmlSerializer to handle attribute XmlSchemePrivider.IsAny. XmlSerializer no longer outputs a root element with class name when the class has the attribute XmlSchemeProvider and IsAny is true. Fixes #11916
- Test that DeflateStream.Read does read an empty stream. Covers #19313.
- Reseting all private key values to null is required because a new import may not overwrite existing values. Fixes #18482.
- Handle quoted filename value. Fixes #21960.
- Dispose XmlReader using correct value. Fixes #21771.

C# Compiler
-----------

- Don't use `1 naming for compiler generated second level and deeper nested types. Fixes #22893.
- Extend missing type check to type lookups. Fixes #20933.
- Fix copy and paste error in constraints checker. Fixes #22131.
- Speed up nullable tokenizer. Fixes #20195.
- Coalescing operator if the lhs of a null is a integer type that is larger than the integer type on the rhs. Fixes #22054.
- Check for duplicate destructors. Fixes #21983.
- Switch statement with constant block at first label. Fixes #21805.
- Decimal constants modulo folding. Fixes #21743.
- Update codegen for boolean loads. Fixes #21685.

MSBuild
-------

- Workaround for issues with CreateItem task where metadata are not generated due to up-to-data inputs. Fixes #23022.
- Add KeepDuplicates etc. to 4.0 as internal. Fixes #20961.
