---
title: New in Mono 3.2.2
---

Highlights
----------

This is a bugfix release.

Some edge cases in our garbage collector that were found in internal testing are now fixed. Multiple C\# compiler issues fixed.

Bugs
----

-   TPL- Fix scheduling of non-inlined synchronous continuations.
-   Weaken a race condition in object initialization
-   Fix race conditions in finalizer/weak link staging
-   Fixed System.Text.Decoder.GetChars(byte\*,int,char\*,int,bool) to copy output into the char\* buffer
-   Fixed configure.in to fail the \_\_thread check with clang
-   Fixed g\_utf8\_to\_utf16\_general() to handle invalid utf8
-   8934 Add more implicit generic array interfaces.
-   13050 Properly null terminate strings in mono\_dwarf\_escape\_path ().
-   13191 Avoid passing partially shared instances to the JIT.
-   13362 Adds async handling to binary:emitbranchable.
-   13443 Add clone for error expression.
-   13454 Lift result of enum substraction when operation is lifted due to non-nullable enum type.
-   13466 Add \*CachePolicy to mobile profile.
-   13476 Ignore space separators in nowarn arguments.
-   13497 Check promoted value type binary equality operations against null too.
-   13509 Remove CultureInfo.CurrentCulture dependency from ordinal based string::EndsWith.
-   13603 Quote path arguments to opt/llc.
-   13604 STW handshake/thread shutdown race condition.
-   13734 Disable LLVM for async methods to work around.
-   13951 Register the jit info for GC critical methods as soon as they are loaded
-   13952 Don't crash when reporting invalid case label value.
