---
title: Mono 4.0.0 Release Notes
---

Currently: contains notes from:

1a341220c6953cad1d7d5b404dfd92a3f65af8af..519ddb9895af5639de5ba0361af54a8d585c4070

Long way to go to the last public release.

Highlights
----------

* Adoption of Microsoft's open source code
* Floating point optimizations
* We dropped support for the 2.0, 3.5 and 4.0 assemblies
* Updated IKVM
* Lighter Debugger overhead
* Basic PowerPC64 LE support

Floating Point Optimizations
============================

Mono has historically chosen to use the highest possible precision for
all floating point operations.  This means that both 64-bit math and
32-bit math were done with the highest precision available.  

But performance sensitive code that might not need high precision was
negatively impacted.   

With this release we are introducing support for performing 32-bit
floating operations using 32-bit math.  This produces faster code at
the expense of fidelity.  This mode of operation can be enabled with
the `-O=float32` option.

With a sample Mandelbrot generator program, on x86-64 these are the
results:

|            |ARM32   |x86-64|
|------------|-------:|-----:|
|Original    |    1m56|  17.2|
|Origina/LLVM|        |  10.3|
|Float32     |    1m12|  12.2|
|Float32/LLVM|        |   8.8|

This option currently needs to be enabled manually, it is not part of
the `-O=all` options.

Microsoft Source Code Adoption
==============================

This is the first release of Mono that replaces various components of
Mono with code that was released by Microsoft under the MIT license in
one of three places:

* Microsoft's ReferenceSource drop
* Microsoft's CoreFX
* Microsoft's CoreCLR

While Microsoft is working towards .NET Core: a redistributable and
re-imagined version of .NET, the project remains a work in progress.
Mono at this point continues to provide an API that tracks the .NET
desktop/server version.

This means that most of the code that we have integrated comes from
the ReferenceSource drop.  In the future, we will deliver a "Mono
Core" along the same lines of .NET Core to allow the use of the Mono
runtime with the new library distribution system that is being
developed with CoreFX.

In this release, we have either ported components that were either
incomplete or buggy in Mono and were relatively easy to port to Mono.
There is much more to be done in this area.  If you are interested in
tracking those efforts, check the project status:

https://trello.com/b/vRPTMfdz/net-framework-integration-into-mono

Mono ships now with a subset of the referencesource that have been
adjusted to work with Mono's class libraries or have been updated to
be cross platform.

### Decimal ###

We have replaced Mono's System.Decimal implementation with Microsoft's
version.  This fixed a couple of formatting bugs.  While Mono's code
did not have any major bugs, Microsoft's implementation is more
efficient and is actively maintained.  Fixing bugs in System.Decimal
was always difficult.

### Assorted Microsoft Classes Imported ###

These are some highlights of code imported from Microsoft (smaller
bits like attributes, enumerations, event arguments, exceptions or
other simple bits are not shown):

The following namespaces have been entirely, or almost entirely replaced with
ReferenceSource code:

* System.Collections
* System.Collections.Concurrent
* System.Collections.Generic
* System.Collections.Specialized
* System.ComponentModel
* System.ComponentModel.Design
* System.Diagnostic.Contracts
* System.Linq.Parallel
* System.Text.RegularExpressionsx
* System.Runtime.CompilerServices
* System.Threading.Tasks

Partial changes:

* System:
** ArraySegment
** BitConverter
** Boolean, Byte, Char, Decimal, Int16, Int32, Int64, SByte, UInt16, UInt32, UInt64,
** Convert
** DateTime, Decimal
** Lazy
** TimeSpan
** Version
* System.Collections.Generic
** HashSet
** Mostly replaced
* System.Diagnostics.Contracts
* System.Globalization
** Entire calendar stack
** DaylightTime
* System.Net
** Cookie, CookieCollection, CookieContainer, 
** FtpWebRequest
** WebClient
* System.Threading (about 60% replaced)

Also the System.Numerics has been updated to use ReferenceSource (it
used an older Microsoft open sourced version of the library in the past)

Garbage Collector
=================

The Xamarin performance team has been fine tuning Mono's SGen garbage
collector.  

Dropped Support for Old Frameworks
==================================

We no longer build or package reference assemblies for the .NET 2.0,
.NET 3.5 or .NET 4.0 APIs.  We only support now the .NET 4.5
assemblies as well as the mobile-based profiles.

The 4.0 reference assemblies are included for the sake of developers
using Mono to build libraries that should be deployed on systems that
use 4.0. These assemblies only contain metadata; they should not be
deployed as they have been stripped of all CIL code.

Lighter Debugger Overhead
=========================

FIXME: add SeqPoint description
       
Other Features
--------------

* New interrupt code (FIXME: fill in details)
* Added LLDB scripts to assist developers debugging the runtime with LLDB
* MonoIO method and classes now uses SafeHandles
* System.Net.NetworkInformation implements more features on more platforms

Fine tuning
===========

We now inline copies of structures up to eight machine words, up from
the previous five.  Values larger than that still call memcpy to
complete the operation.

More methods can be compiled with LLVM on ARM.  This helps many
methods that passed large structures as parameters.

All atomic methods in the framework are now recognized by the JIT as
intrinsics and are inlined as specialized code on platforms that support
it. This includes all methods on `Interlocked` and `Volatile`, as well
as the `MemoryBarrier`, `VolatileRead`, and `VolatileWrite` methods on
`Thread`.

On x86-64, `Thread.MemoryBarrier` is now implemented with `mfence` instead
of `lock add rsp, 0`. Also, `Interlocked.Exchange` is now implemented with
`xchg [dst], val` instead of the overly expensive `lock cmpxchg [dst], val`
loop we previously emitted.

For atomic methods with acquire/release semantics, we now emit memory
barriers with those semantics instead of the overly strong sequentially
consistent kind.

The `Enum.HasFlag` method is now significantly faster for the most typical
usage pattern, which is `a.HasFlag (b)` where `a` and `b` are the exact
same type. We transform such calls to an actual bitwise AND and skip all
the heavy reflection normally done in the method. This is about 60x faster
than before. Additionally, the regular implementation of the method which
is only used for rare/pathological cases is now 4x faster than before.

The JIT now avoids emitting pointless move opcodes when the destination
register is the same as the source register.

Linker/Preserve
===============

Support for 

MSBuild
=======

Lluis' changes.

monop tool
==========

The `monop` tool now uses IKVM.Reflection to load assemblies, so it will
work with foreign mscorlibs.  In addition the `-xi` and `-xa` flags
can be used to search types in the Xamarin.Android and Xamarin.iOS
frameworks.

musl libc
=========

There is now rudimentary support for building Mono with the musl libc on
Linux. To do this, pass `--disable-boehm --without-sigaltstack` to
`configure`.

C99 switch
==========

The runtime now requires a compiler with C99 support. For Windows users,
this means that Visual Studio 2013 is now required to build Mono. Cygwin or
MinGW users should not be affected by this change. Similarly, compilers on
most Unix platforms have supported C99 for a long time.

Bug Fixes
---------

[ FIXME: insert list of bugs fixes from script ]

Runtime/JIT
===========

* Fixed some cases where some runtime-internal memory barriers would not
  actually be emitted because the barrier kind field was being set to
  nonsensical values. Note: This did not affect `Thread.MemoryBarrier`.
* Fixed memory ordering of `Interlocked.CompareExchange` to be sequentially
  consistent instead of combined acquire/release when using LLVM.
* Fixed some atomic intrinsics not getting a stack type set, leading to
  issues in the `method-to-ir` code generation pass.

Class Libraries
===============

* MemoryMapped fixes

Contributors
------------
