---
layout: releasenotes
title: 'UNRELEASED: Mono 4.6.0 Release Notes'
version: 4.6.0
---

Coverage
========

The release notes cover the changes from:

End:
Start:

Preview Releases
================

Highlights
==========

In Depth
========

### POTENTIALLY - TLS

We have added a new implementation of TLS that supports TLS up to
version 1.2 (the old version only supported up to 1.0).  This is a
completely new implementation, and given that it is new, we do not
currently default to it, but we hope to switch to it in the future.

We have an implementation switcher on both the `SslStream` and
`HttpListener` classes.  The default implementation of `SslStream` for now
continues to be the old Mono TLS implementation, the one that supports
SSL and up to TLS 1.0.  But it is now possible to switch the
implementation to either our new managed implementation or any
implementation built on top of something else.

You can control this with the `MONO_TLS_PROVIDER` environment variable.
The possible settings are as follows:

* `default` - let Mono choose the best implementation available for the
platform, currently this is hardcoded to the old implementation, but
we will change this once we complete the audit of our TLS stack, and
we might change this on a per-platform basis to use SslStream
implementations that use some native library.

* `oldtls` - Mono’s historical implementation, it only goes up to TLS 1.0.

* `newtls` - Mono’s new managed implementation, it supports TLS 1.0 up to
1.2

* Any full typename - You can specify a fully qualified .NET Type, this
can be used to test alternative implementations without changing
Mono’s runtime: `MONO_TLS_PROVIDER="Mono.Security.Providers.NewTls.NewTlsProvider,
Mono.Security.Providers.NewTls, Version=4.0.0.0, Culture=neutral,
PublicKeyToken=84e3aee7225169c2`

For custom implementations, the type should subclass the
`Mono.Security.Interface.MonoTlsProvider` interface from the
`Mono.Security` assembly and have a public parameterless constructor.

### Mono symbolicate

`mono-symbolicate` requires symbols to convert native and IL offsets into file names and line numbers.
`mono-symbolicate` original version required its caller to provide a stack trace along with the symbols to be used.
The task of mapping a stack trace to the correct symbols was delegated to the caller.
Doing such mapping revealed to be a big usability problem as it was necessary to track the stack trace's assemblies versions externally.

Stack trace format changes were introduced to let `mono-symbolicate` know the symbols of stack traces with:
 - IL offsets, as there was no way of knowing to which version of the managed assembly the IL refers to.
 - Native offsets, as multiple .msym are generated and it was not possible to directly link the stack trace to those symbols.

The problem of mapping a stack trace IL offsets to the correct managed assembly version was fixed by changing a stack frame such as:
```
  at StackTraceDumper.Main () [0x00000] in <filename unknown>:0
```
into one as:
```
  at StackTraceDumper.Main () [0x00000] in <cwa3ec873a838c42c29f4eba7cab7d1dfb>:0
```
Where the hash looking part in between `<>` is the module version ID (MVID) of the assembly module the method belongs to.

The problem of mapping native offsets to the correct .msym version was done by replacing a stack frame such as:
```
  at StackTraceDumper.<Main>m__0 () <0x100e15d50 + 0x00029> in <filename unknown>:0
```
by one as:
```
  at StackTraceDumper.<Main>m__0 () <0x100e15d50 + 0x00029> in <a3ec873a838c42c29f4eba7cab7d1dfb#b37a9d11247b811ffffdaff8090d8a59>:0
```
The new stack frame also displays the MVID but after the `#` it also displays what we named as AOTID, a unique identifier embedded into the AOT compiled assembly.

With the changes above it is possible to know from the stack frames only which symbols versions are to be used in order to symbolicate it.

A symbol directory was also introduced, its purpose is to store managed assemblies into subfolders MVID named and native assemblies into subfolders AOTID named.

`mono-symbolicate` is now able to retrieve the correct symbols versions from the stack trace, and to symbolicate using the symbols in the symbol directory.

The changes greatly improved `mono-symbolicate` usability and eliminated the versioning issues it had before.

For `mono-symbolicate` to work it requires a data structure called compact sequence point to be created and stored while compiling IL to native code.
The purpose of compact sequence points is to map native offsets into IL offset so the runtime can display IL offsets instead of native ones.

The memory overhead of using compact sequence points is about 10% of the compiled native code size.
The time spent compiling increased by 4%, this is usually not an issue, 2ms for whole mscorlib.
With AOT compiled assemblies there is the option of storing compact sequence points externally into .msym files, with no overheads at runtime.
Overall the overheads were considered a small price to pay for the huge benefit of being able to symbolicate any future stack trace as long as the symbols are properly stored.

Mono can still be ran without compact sequence points by doing:
```
MONO_DEBUG=no-compact-seq-points mono Program.exe
```
By doing so Mono runtime will not be able to output IL offsets instead of native ones in the stack traces and `mono-symbolicate` will not work.

`mono-symbolicate` can be found [here](https://github.com/mono/mono/tree/mono-4.6.0-branch/mcs/tools/mono-symbolicate)

### Log Profiler v1.0

This Mono release will feature version 1.0 of the
[log profiler](/docs/debug+profile/profile/profiler/). This is the most stable
version of the profiler to date. While there are a few new features, the focus
has been on hardening the profiler to run on all sorts of platforms (including
Linux, OS X, Android, and iOS) without crashing or otherwise destabilizing the
program being profiled.

#### New Features & Changes

* The profiler now has support for gathering coverage data. This data can be
  processed into XML by `mprof-report`.
* The profiler will now provide a stack trace with GC handle creation/deletion
  events when possible, making it easier to track down where a GC handle came
  from.
* The profiler now uses a real-time signal to do sampling when supported by
  the operating system. This leads to significantly better signal delivery
  rates (usually 99-100%).
* The profiler now sets `SA_RESTART` for its profiling signal to work around
  buggy code in the wild that assumes that a system call can't be interrupted
  by arbitrary signals.
* The profiler now uses a separate thread for sample hit processing, thus
  ensuring that it will not interfere with performance counter sampling.
* The profiler will now attempt to switch the internal sampling thread to
  real-time priority scheduling for more consistent sample signal delivery.
  This usually only works for `root`.
* The profiler now uses a separate thread for flushing buffers to the output
  file, allowing it to flush buffers in more places.
* The profiler now flushes all thread-local buffers periodically and during
  certain global GC events in the program. Therefore, all code in the profiler
  that manually flushed buffers unconditionally has been removed.
* The command line argument for sampling frequency is now correctly interpreted
  as the frequency in Hz, rather than the interval between samples.
* The default sampling frequency is now 100 Hz (down from 1 kHz).
* `perf` support for Linux now works on ARM64.
* `perf` support for Linux is now disabled by default as it was too unstable on
  older kernels. It can still be enabled by passing `--enable-perf-events` to
  `configure` if you know your kernel has working support.
* Introduced synchronization point events in the format which can be seen as a
  sort of 'memory barrier'. A reader can know with certainty that the
  profiling session will be in a consistent state at every synchronization
  point.
* The profiler now emits events for object finalization.
* The profiler now emits more metadata load/unload and name change events.
* Cleaned up the log format to not use LEB128 for data types that don't need
  it, and to not emit pointless data that was never used.
* All events in the log format now carry a timestamp.

#### Stability Fixes

* Fixed on-demand heapshots often resulting in crashes due to being processed
  on the profiler's helper thread.
* Fixed a GC crash that could occur when sampling and a thread was stopped in
  the middle of a managed allocator.
* Fixed a stack corruption that could occur in the old sample hit processing
  code. This code has been rewritten entirely.
* Fixed a crash when sampling that was caused by incorrect snapshot iteration
  logic in Mono's linked list set code.
* Fixed a TLS crash that could occur on OS X and iOS when sampling, because
  sampling signals were being sent to threads before they had finished basic
  initialization in `libc`.
* Fixed crashes on Linux when sampling caused by the ELF header traversal code.
  This code has been disabled as it didn't provide information that was
  particularly useful for programmers writing managed code.
* Fixed crashes on OS X when sampling caused by invoking the dynamic linker in
  the sampling callback (async-signal context).
* Fixed the profiler's helper thread to reject on-demand heapshot requests when
  the profiler is not in on-demand mode.
* Fixed a crash that could happen on startup because Mono's threading subsystem
  wasn't initialized yet.
* Fixed the internal profiler threads not detaching from the runtime on
  shutdown.
* Fixed a number of potential buffer overflows when writing events.
* Fixed a potential hazardous free crash when shutting down the profiler.
* Fixed potential race conditions when doing the final sample dump on shutdown.

#### Bug Fixes

* Fixed many cases where events would be emitted in an incorrect order. This
  mainly affected sample hit and method JIT events, as well as GC allocation
  and move events.
* Fixed some class load events that could be lost in the profiler's writer
  thread.
* Fixed the profiler missing a lot of metadata unload events because it was
  shut down too early.
* Fixed internal profiler threads sometimes showing up in thread start/stop
  events.
* Fixed heapshots and coverage recording incorrectly being subject to call
  depth restrictions.
* Fixed certain code paths in the profiler not calling `fflush` on the output
  file.
* Fixed a small memory leak in the profiler's writer thread.
* Fixed the profiler printing a misleading `time went backwards` debug message.

### New default GC bridge processor on Android

The Android implementation makes use of a "bridge processor" which coordinates communication between the Mono and Java garbage collectors. There are three bridge processor implementations included, "old", "new" and "tarjan". In 4.6.0 the default has been changed from "new" to "tarjan". This should result in performance improvements during GC for Android apps (or desktop apps using java.interop) that had not already selected the "tarjan" collector.

### FullAOT: Generic Value Type Sharing on x86-64

The gsharedvt capability, which allows certain complex uses of generics to be used in FullAOT mode, is now available on the x86-64 ISA on Mac OS X and Linux-based platforms. This means gsharedvt is now available on all platforms where FullAOT itself is supported.

### New `disable_omit_fp` option for JIT/AOT compiler

A new flag on the `MONO_DEBUG` environment variable (`MONO_DEBUG="disable_omit_fp"`) disables an optimization used by the JIT and AOT compilers where the frame pointer is omitted from stack frames. This flag is likely to result in a small performance hit but can improve the ability of external debuggers to properly display function names, particularly when using AOT.

### Changed search path order for custom profilers

When using a custom profiler library, the mono installation is now preferred over the assembly root or default library search path. 

Bug Fixes
=========

* #[37834](https://bugzilla.xamarin.com/show_bug.cgi?id=37834) - System.IO.File.GetAttributes now honors the "uchg" flag on OS X when determining file writability.
* #[38025](https://bugzilla.xamarin.com/show_bug.cgi?id=38025) - The debugger now steps and breaks correctly when stepping into, over or out of a function which recursively calls itself.
* #[39669](https://bugzilla.xamarin.com/show_bug.cgi?id=39669) - When using XML configuration files, a broader set of configuration section types is now available, including System.Configuration.DictionarySectionHandler.
* #[39824](https://bugzilla.xamarin.com/show_bug.cgi?id=38025) - Exceptions can now be serialized using SerializeObjectState.
* Some issues with building on Windows have been addressed.

Contributors
============
