---
layout: releasenotes
title: 'Mono 5.2.0 Release Notes'
version: 5.2.0
---

**THIS IS A DRAFT/WORK IN PROGRESS PLACEHOLDER OF THE 5.2 RELEASE NOTES**

Release History
===============

* 5.2.0.215 - Beta Release _(01 August 2017)_
* 5.2.0.213 - Beta Release _(24 July 2017)_
* 5.2.0.209 - Beta Release _(12 July 2017)_
* 5.2.0.196 - Beta Release _(29 June 2017)_
* 5.2.0.179 - Beta Release _(15 June 2017)_
* 5.2.0.104 - Alpha Release _(11 May 2017)_

Highlights
==========

* [`mono` command defaults to 64bit](#mono-command-defaults-to-64bit)
* [Experimental Default Interface Methods Support](#experimental-default-interface-methods-support)

In Depth
========

Strong assembly names
---------------------

Mono will now optionally respect public keys and version numbers when loading strongly signed assemblies.  If Mono is invoked with the `--assembly-loader=strict` option, then requests (whether via a static assembly reference, or using an assembly name using the reflection API) that include a public key token and version number will only load strong named assemblies with a matching token and name (respecting any bindings in relevant app config files).

To debug the assembly loading process, set the logging environment variables to trace level "info" or lower and trace filter to include "asm".  (See [Logging runtime events](/docs/advanced/runtime/logging-runtime-events/).)

The current default behavior is the same as in previous Mono versions. It is explicitly available with the `--assembly-loader=legacy` option.

Experimental Default Interface Methods Support
----------------------------------------------

We added experimental support for the current prototype.
Check the [C# specs](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/master/proposals/default-interface-methods.md)

Class Libraries
---------------

### System.Numerics.Vectors

Multiple fixes and new intrinsics added. The library is now considered ready for general usage.

### .NET Standard 2.0 groundwork

We've done all the groundwork to support libraries that conform to .NET Standard 2.0.
Loading and running a library compiled against the 2.0 standard should work fine,
tooling support (i.e. creating a .NET Standard 2.0 library) is still in preview though.

You'll need to install the [.NET Core 2.0 SDK](https://www.microsoft.com/net/core) for tooling support
as we use the MSBuild tasks which are installed as part of the .NET Core 2.0 SDK, similar
to how Visual Studio/MSBuild on Windows does it.

### Reference assemblies

The reference assemblies were updated to provide the .NET 4.7 API set.

Runtime
-------

### `mono` command defaults to 64bit

The `mono` command now runs as a 64bit application by default. You can use the `--arch=32` option to run Mono as 32bit again.

### Optimized Array Stores

Added a fast path for storing on array of reference values when the stored value is of the same type of the array element type.

### Class Initialization Improvements

Do hold any runtime locks while running the class initializer. This improves startup scalability.

### Reduced minor collection pause times

Made the runtime tables used to store reflection information generational, so the GC can avoid scanning them during minor collections.
Those tables can become significantly large on workloads like Visual Studio for Mac.

### Interpreter passes the majority of the JIT test suite

Major progress was made on the interpreter front. It can now run non-trivial programs.

Misc
----

### Internal Documentation

We continue to publish [internal docs for mono](http://www.mono-project.com/api/), making it more convenient to browse and search the Mono runtime internals and associated documentation.

### Static Analysis

In order to holistically improve the correctness and stability of Mono, we have been investing effort in custom [static analysis tooling](https://github.com/evincarofautumn/Ward), which will be deployed as part of our continuous build to rule out certain classes of bugs. Recently we have made progress on minimizing the amount of manual annotation work required to add new analyses, making it easier for us to verify more properties of our code.

### Mangler V1

Managed methods can include a dizzying array of attributes beyond the actual method code. The mangler encodes the attributes which are necessary to create a unique name for each method. If two methods mangle to the same string, they are the same method. This can be thought of as a primary key for each method, and extends to methods which are mono wrappers. Internally, mono is using it to build a deduplicating pass to remove binary bloat associated with generics.

### Safer Getenv

The functions g_getenv and g_setenv are neither threadsafe nor reentrant. Subsequent calls to g_getenv can cause previous strings returned from it to point to garbage memory. This was leading to issues with System.Configuration that could be seen with HttpClient. Now we lock around these calls and return duplicated memory. This is a serious API change to g_getenv. The string returned must now always be freed. We don't expect many embedders to be using the version of eglib that is linked into mono for other functions. Those who do might want to check that this change does not introduce memory leaks.

Bug Fixes
=========

/placeholder for automatically generated list of fixed bugzilla bugs/

* [580](https://bugzilla.xamarin.com/show_bug.cgi?id=580): Type.Load loads strong type despite version mismatch (see [Strong assembly names](#strong-assembly-names))
* [49721](https://bugzilla.xamarin.com/show_bug.cgi?id=49721): Assembly binder uses wrong strongly named assembly when same assembly with different version exists in local folder (see [Strong assembly names](#strong-assembly-names))

Contributors
============

Aaron Bockover, Adrian Cheng, Aleksey Kliger, Alexander Köplinger, Alexander Kyte, Alexis Christoforides, Andi McClure, Andoni Morales Alastruey, Ankit Jain, Bernhard Urban, Brian Raderman, Calvin Buckley, Chris Hamons, Cody Russell, Damien Diederen, Daniel C. Weber, David Karlaš, Dean Ellis, Eberhard Beilharz, Edward Betts, Egor Bogatov, Filip Navara, Francois Botha, Frederik Carlier, Jan-Joost Spanjers, Jb Evain, Johan Lorensson, Jonathan Chambers, Jonathan Pryor, Jon Purdy, Ludovic Henry, Luis Aguilera, Manuel de la Pena, Marcin Cieślak, Marek Habersack, Marek Safar, Martin Baulig, Mathieu Bourgeois, Michael DeRoy, Miguel de Icaza, Mikayla Hutchinson, Neale Ferguson, Niklas Therning, Nikolay Amiantov, Jaymin Patel, Rodrigo Kumpera, Rolf Bjarne Kvinge, Pei Su, Vincent Povirk, Vlad Brezae, Vladimir Kargov, Vladimir Kazakov, Zoltan Varga
