---
layout: releasenotes
title: 'Mono 5.8.0 Release Notes'
version: 5.8.0
releasedate: '2018-02-01'
---

_Note: we're aware of an issue with the 5.8.0.108 Linux packages not showing up correctly in package managers and are working on a solution._

Release History
===============

* 5.8.0.108 - Stable Release _(1 February 2018)_
* 5.8.0.108 - Alpha Release _(23 January 2018)_
* 5.8.0.103 - Preview Release _(10 January 2018)_

Highlights
==========

* [Initial WebAssembly port landed](#webassembly)
* [SGen GC modes](#modes-for-the-sgen-gc)
* [Added csi tool](#csi)

In Depth
========

Runtime
-------

### WebAssembly

This release includes our preliminary port of Mono to WebAssembly. It should be possible to build both the runtime and class libraries targeting it.

### Interpreter

Parts of the work to revamp the interpreter landed in this release, check out [the blog post](/news/2017/11/13/mono-interpreter/) to learn more about our plans in that area.

### Profiler

Added a new quiet mode to the profiler where a minimal set of events are enabled by default and all high volume events must be explicitly enabled. This gives better control on the profiler and should make it usable for long profiling sessions.

Added a preview version of the Mono.Profiler.Log.dll which provides an API to the profiler. It is still unstable as we're working
to define the feature set.

### Verifier

The runtime verifier now supports C# 7.0 byref returns.

### Modes for the SGen GC

Our sgen garbage collector now has support for so called "modes". They allow telling the GC more about the workload you're running
so that it can optimize its behavior, e.g. if you care more about high throughput than low pause times. This is much simpler than figuring out the correct values for other, more low-level GC knobs.

Check out the `mode` parameter documentation for the `MONO_GC_PARAMS` environment variable in the man page.

### Other changes

Improved compatibily with alternative languages that depend on implicit widening of locals.

Class Libraries
---------------

We're continuing on our plan to share more source code with CoreFX and replaced several more classes in this release.

Tools
-----

### csi

You are now able to use Roslyn's `csi` (C# interactive) REPL tool from the command line.

It is similar to the `csharp` tool we had in Mono for a long time.

### Roslyn / csc

Roslyn was updated to the 2.3.2 release.

### mcs

mcs now has better support for C# 7 syntax.

### MSBuild

msbuild was updated to a newer upstream version that among other things includes a performance improvement when building on macOS.

### mkbundle

mkbundle had a few issues when running on macOS, those are fixed. It now also provides better error messages when something goes wrong.

### ilasm

ilasm gained support for the `AggressiveInlining` keyword.

Bug Fixes
=========

TODO

Contributors
============

Aleksey Kliger, Alex Rønne Petersen, Alexander Kyte, Alexander Köplinger, Alexis Christoforides, Andi McClure,
Ankit Jain, Armin Hasitzka, Bernhard Urban, Chris Hamons, Cody Russell, David Karlaš, Eberhard Beilharz, Jason Imison,
Jo Shields, Johan Lorensson, Jon Purdy, Jonathan Chambers, Jonathan Pryor, Katelyn Gadd, Ludovic Henry, Marek Habersack,
Marek Safar, Marius Ungureanu, Martin Baulig, Miguel de Icaza, Niklas Therning, Rodrigo Kumpera, Rodrigo Moya,
Toni Spets, Uri Simchoni, Vlad Brezae, Vladimir Kargov, Vladimir Kazakov, Zoltan Varga
