---
layout: blog
title: "Profiler Stability: Sampling and Managed Allocators"
author: Alex Rønne Petersen
tags: [profiler]
---

This is the first in a series of posts I'll be writing on the work we've been
doing to improve the stability of Mono's
[log profiler](/docs/debug+profile/profile/profiler/). All improvements
detailed in these blog posts are included in Mono 4.6.0, featuring version 1.0
of the profiler. Refer to the
[release notes](/docs/about-mono/releases/4.6.0/) for the full list of changes
and fixes.

The problem we'll be looking at today is a crash that arose when running the
profiler in sampling mode (i.e. `mono --profile=log:sample foo.exe`) together
with the [SGen garbage collector](/docs/advanced/garbage-collector/sgen/).

## The Problem

SGen uses so-called managed allocators to perform very fast allocations from
the nursery (generation 0). These managed allocators are generated by the Mono
runtime and contain specialized code for allocating particular kinds of
types (small objects, strings, arrays, etc). One important invariant that
managed allocators rely on is that a garbage collection absolutely cannot
proceed if any suspended thread was executing a managed allocator at the time
it was suspended. This allows the managed allocators to do their thing without
taking the global GC lock, which is a huge performance win for multithreaded
programs. Should this invariant be broken, however, the state of the managed
heap is essentially undefined and all sorts of bad things will happen when the
GC proceeds to doing scanning and sweeping.

Unfortunately, the way that sampling works caused this invariant to be broken.
When the profiler is running in sampling mode, it periodically sends out a
signal (e.g. `SIGPROF`) whose signal handler will collect a managed stack trace
for the target thread and write it as an event to the log file. There's nothing
actually wrong with this. However, the way that SGen checks whether a thread is
currently executing a managed allocator is as follows (simplified a bit from
the actual source code):

```c
static gboolean
is_ip_in_managed_allocator (MonoDomain *domain, gpointer ip)
{
    /*
     * ip is the instruction pointer of the thread, as obtained by the STW
     * machinery when it temporarily suspends the thread.
     */

    MonoJitInfo *ji = mono_jit_info_table_find_internal (domain, ip, FALSE, FALSE);

    if (!ji)
        return FALSE;

    MonoMethod *m = mono_jit_info_get_method (ji);

    return sgen_is_managed_allocator (m);
}
```

To understand why this code is problematic, we must first take a look at how
signal delivery works on POSIX systems. By default, a signal can be delivered
while another signal is still being handled. For example, if your program has
two separate signal handlers for `SIGUSR1` and `SIGUSR2`, both of which simply
do `while (1);` to spin forever, and you send `SIGUSR1` followed by `SIGUSR2`
to your program, you'll see a stack trace looking something like this:

```gdb
(gdb) bt
#0  0x0000000000400564 in sigusr2_signal_handler ()
#1  <signal handler called>
#2  0x0000000000400553 in sigusr1_signal_handler ()
#3  <signal handler called>
#4  0x00000000004005d3 in main ()
```

Unsurprisingly, if we print the instruction pointer, we'll find that it's
pointing into the most recently called signal handler:

```gdb
(gdb) p $pc
$1 = (void (*)()) 0x400564 <sigusr2_signal_handler+15>
```

This matters because SGen uses a signal of its own to suspend threads in its
STW machinery. So that means we have two signals in play: The sampling signal
used by the profiler, and the suspend signal used by SGen. Both signals can
arrive at any point, including while the other is being handled. In an
allocation-heavy program, we could very easily see a stack looking something
like this:

```gdb
#0 suspend_signal_handler ()
#1 <signal handler called>
#2 profiler_signal_handler ()
#3 <signal handler called>
#4 AllocSmall ()
...
```

(Here, `AllocSmall` is the managed allocator.)

Under normal (non-profiling) circumstances, it would look like this:

```gdb
#0 suspend_signal_handler ()
#1 <signal handler called>
#2 AllocSmall ()
...
```

Mono installs signal handlers using the `sigaction` function with the
`SA_SIGINFO` flag. This means that the signal handler will receive a bunch of
information in its second and third arguments. One piece of that information
is the instruction pointer of the thread before the signal handler was invoked.
This is the instruction pointer that is passed to the
`is_ip_in_managed_allocator` function. So when we're profiling, we pass an
instruction pointer that points into the middle of `profiler_signal_handler`,
while in the normal case, we pass an instruction pointer that points into
`AllocSmall` as expected.

So now the problem is clear: In the normal case, SGen detects that the thread
is executing a managed allocator, and therefore waits for it to finish
executing before truly suspending the thread. But in the profiling case, SGen
thinks that the thread is just executing any arbitrary, unimportant code that
it can go right ahead and suspend, even though we know for a fact (from
inspecting the stack in GDB) that it is actually in the middle of executing a
managed allocator.

When this situation arises, SGen will go right ahead and perform a full
garbage collection, even though it'll see an inconsistent managed heap as a
result of the managed allocator being in the middle of modifying the
heap. Entire books could be written about the incorrect behavior that could
result from this under different circumstances, but long story short, your
program would crash in random ways.

## Potential Solutions

At first glance, this didn't seem like a hard problem to solve. My initial
thought was to set up the signal handler for `SIGPROF` in such a way that the
GC suspend signal would be blocked while the handler is executing. Thing is,
this would've actually fixed the problem, but not in a general way. After all,
who's to say that some other signal couldn't come along and trigger this
problem? For example, a programmer might P/Invoke some native code that sets up
a signal handler for some arbitrary purpose. The user would then want to send
that signal to the Mono process and not have things break left and right. We
can't reasonably ask every Mono user to block the GC suspend signal in any
signal handlers they might set up, directly or indirectly. Even if we could, it
isn't a good idea, as we really want the GC suspend signal to arrive in a
timely fashion so that the STW process doesn't take too long (resulting in long
pause times).

OK, so that idea wasn't really gonna work. Another idea that we considered was
to unwind the stack of the suspended thread to see if any stack frame matches a
managed allocator. This would solve the problem and would work for any kind of
signal that might arrive before a GC suspend signal. Unfortunately, unwinding
the stack of a suspended thread is not particularly easy, and it can't be done
in a portable way at all. Also, stack unwinding is not exactly a cheap affair,
and the last thing we want is to make the STW machinery slower - nobody wants
longer pause times.

Finally, there was the nuclear option: Disable managed allocators completely
when running the profiler in sampling mode. Sure, it would make this problem go
away, but as with the first idea, SGen would still be susceptible to this
problem with other kinds of signals when running normally. More importantly,
this would result in misleading profiles since the program would spend more
time in the native SGen allocation functions than it would have in the
managed allocators when not profiling.

None of the above are really viable solutions.

## The Fix

Conveniently, SGen has this feature called critical regions. They're not quite
what you might think - they have nothing to do with mutexes. Let's take a look
at how SGen allocates a `System.String` in the native allocation functions:

```c
MonoString *
mono_gc_alloc_string (MonoVTable *vtable, size_t size, gint32 len)
{
    TLAB_ACCESS_INIT;

    ENTER_CRITICAL_REGION;

    MonoString *str = sgen_try_alloc_obj_nolock (vtable, size);

    if (str)
        str->length = len;

    EXIT_CRITICAL_REGION;

    if (!str) {
        LOCK_GC;

        str = sgen_alloc_obj_nolock (vtable, size);

        if (str)
            str->length = len;

        UNLOCK_GC;
    }

    return str;
}
```

The actual allocation logic (in `sgen_try_alloc_obj_nolock` and
`sgen_alloc_obj_nolock`) is unimportant. The important bits are
`TLAB_ACCESS_INIT`, `ENTER_CRITICAL_REGION`, and `EXIT_CRITICAL_REGION`. These
macros are defined as follows:

```c
#define TLAB_ACCESS_INIT SgenThreadInfo *__thread_info__ = mono_native_tls_get_value (thread_info_key)
#define IN_CRITICAL_REGION (__thread_info__->client_info.in_critical_region)
#define ENTER_CRITICAL_REGION do { mono_atomic_store_acquire (&IN_CRITICAL_REGION, 1); } while (0)
#define EXIT_CRITICAL_REGION do { mono_atomic_store_release (&IN_CRITICAL_REGION, 0); } while (0)
```

As you can see, they simply set a variable on the current thread for the
duration of the attempted allocation. If this variable is set, the STW
machinery will refrain from suspending the thread in much the same way as it
would when checking the thread's instruction pointer against the code ranges of
the managed allocators.

So the fix to this whole problem is actually very simple: We just set up a
critical region in the managed allocator, just like we do in the native SGen
functions. That is, we wrap all the code we emit in the managed allocator like
so:

```c
static MonoMethod *
create_allocator (int atype, ManagedAllocatorVariant variant)
{
    // ... snip ...

    MonoMethodBuilder *mb = mono_mb_new (mono_defaults.object_class, name, MONO_WRAPPER_ALLOC);
    int thread_var;

    // ... snip ...

    EMIT_TLS_ACCESS_VAR (mb, thread_var);

    EMIT_TLS_ACCESS_IN_CRITICAL_REGION_ADDR (mb, thread_var);
    mono_mb_emit_byte (mb, CEE_LDC_I4_1);
    mono_mb_emit_byte (mb, MONO_CUSTOM_PREFIX);
    mono_mb_emit_byte (mb, CEE_MONO_ATOMIC_STORE_I4);
    mono_mb_emit_i4 (mb, MONO_MEMORY_BARRIER_NONE);

    // ... snip: allocation logic ...

    EMIT_TLS_ACCESS_IN_CRITICAL_REGION_ADDR (mb, thread_var);
    mono_mb_emit_byte (mb, CEE_LDC_I4_0);
    mono_mb_emit_byte (mb, MONO_CUSTOM_PREFIX);
    mono_mb_emit_byte (mb, CEE_MONO_ATOMIC_STORE_I4);
    mono_mb_emit_i4 (mb, MONO_MEMORY_BARRIER_REL);

    // ... snip ...

    MonoMethod *m = mono_mb_create (mb, csig, 8, info);
    mono_mb_free (mb);

    return m;
}
```

With that done, SGen will correctly detect that a managed allocator is
executing no matter how many signal handlers may be nested on the thread.
Checking the `in_critical_region` variable also happens to be quite a bit
cheaper than looking up JIT info for the managed allocators.

## Performance Implications

I ran this small program before and after the changes:

```csharp
using System;

class Program {
    public static object o;

    static void Main ()

        for (var i = 0; i < 100000000; i++)
            o = new object ();
    }
}
```

Before:

```bash
real    0m0.625s
user    0m0.652s
sys     0m0.032s
```

After:

```bash
real    0m0.883s
user    0m0.948s
sys     0m0.012s
```

So we're observing about a 40% slowdown from this change on a microbenchmark
that does nothing but allocate. The slowdown comes from the managed allocators
now having to do two atomic stores, one of which also carries with it a memory
barrier with release semantics.

So on one hand, the slowdown is not great. But on the other hand, there is no
point in being fast if Mono is crashy as a result. To put things in
perspective, this program is still way slower without managed allocators
(`MONO_GC_DEBUG=no-managed-allocator`):

```bash
real    0m7.678s
user    0m8.529s
sys     0m0.024s
```

Managed allocators are still around 770% faster. The 40% slowdown doesn't seem
like much when you consider these numbers, especially when it's for the purpose
of fixing a crash.

More detailed benchmark results from the Xamarin benchmarking infrastructure
can be found
[here](http://open.xamarin.com/benchmarker/front-end/pullrequest.html#id=337).

## Conclusion

By setting up a critical region in SGen's managed allocator methods, we've
fixed a number of random crashes that would occur when using sample profiling
together with the SGen GC. A roughly 40% slowdown was observed on one
microbenchmark, however, managed allocators are still around 770% faster than
SGen's native allocation functions, so it's a small price to pay for a more
reliable Mono.

---

In the next post, we'll take a look at an issue that plagued profiler users on
OS X: A crash when sending sampling signals to threads that hadn't yet finished
basic initialization in `libc`, leading to broken TLS access. This issue forced
us to rewrite the sampling infrastructure in the runtime.
