---
layout: obsolete
title: "Command-Line Tools"
lastmodified: '2007-02-05'
permalink: /old_site/Command-Line_Tools/
redirect_from:
  - /Command-Line_Tools/
---

Command-Line Tools
==================

There are several command line utitlities included in Mono that constitute the devevelopment toolchain. These are key components which you'll want to familiarize yourself with:

<table>
<col width="100%" />
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><h2>Table of contents</h2>
<ul>
<li><a href="#main-tools">1 Main tools</a></li>
<li><a href="#miscellaneous-tools">2 Miscellaneous tools</a></li>
<li><a href="#xml--web-service">3 XML &amp; Web Service</a></li>
<li><a href="#project-converstion--deployment">4 Project converstion &amp; deployment</a></li>
<li><a href="#security">5 Security</a></li>
<li><a href="#help--documentation">6 Help &amp; Documentation</a></li>
</ul></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Main tools
==========

-   [mono]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/Main_Page) is the Mono runtime and Just In Time compiler (JIT)
-   [mcs]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/CSharp_Compiler), Mono's C\# compiler
-   [gacutil]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/Assemblies_and_the_GAC) is a tool used by developers to install versioned assemblies into the system Global Assembly Cache (GAC) to become part of the assemblies that are available for all applications at runtime.
-   [mint]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/Porting), the mono interpreter
-   [xsp]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/ASP.NET), mono's stand alone ASP.NET web services and web application server
-   mono-config - Mono runtime file format configuration

Miscellaneous tools
===================

-   ilasm: IL assembler
-   monodis: IL disassembler
-   monop: command line class display.
-   sn: StrongName (code signing) utility for signing IL assemblies
-   sqlsharp: command line SQL client for most of the the System.Data based DB Connectors
-   [Gendarme]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/Gendarme "Gendarme"): Rule-based assembly analyser for developpers.
-   [Monoxide]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/Monoxide "Monoxide"): Interactive assembly analyser.

XML & Web Service
=================

(see man pages and Microsoft docs)

-   xsd
-   genxs
-   dtd2xsd
-   wsdl & wsdl2
-   disco
-   soapsuds

Project converstion & deployment
================================

-   prj2make: Convert Micrsoft Visual Studio 2002 and 2003 solution and project files to makefiles to ease the transition to Mono
-   mkbundle: Packages an exe and all assemblies with libmono into a single binary package.
-   macpak: Packages mono and assemblies together to so they may run on Mac OS X

Security
========

-   caspol: Tool to modify Code Access Security [CAS]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/CAS "CAS") policies.
-   cert2spc: Transform a set of X.509 certificates and CRLs into an Authenticode(tm) "Software Publisher Certificate"
-   certmgr: Manage X.509 certificates and CRL from stores.
-   chktrust: Verify if an PE executable has a valid Authenticode(tm) signature
-   makecert: X.509 Certificate Builder, e.g. SSL server/client, Authenticode(tm)
-   mozroots: Download and import trusted root certificates from Mozilla's LXR.
-   permview: Permission Viewer for .NET assemblies.
-   secutil: Extract strongname and X509 certificates from assemblies.
-   setreg: Change settings for public key cryptography.
-   signcode: Sign assemblies and PE files using Authenticode(tm).

Help & Documentation
====================

-   mod: a command line monodoc reader
-   [assembler]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/Assembler "Assembler"): A tool for assembling documentation generated by [monodocer]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/Monodocer "Monodocer").
-   [monodocer]({{ site.github.url }}/old_site/Monodocer "Monodocer"): Generates documentation out of assemblys.


